# The reLyX bundled with LyX 1.3 created this file.
# For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass report
\paperfontsize 11
\use_amsmath 1
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0

\layout Standard

Some overwhelming questions that drive computational science are how fast
 can the answer be computed, how accurate is the answer, and how stable
 is the method for obtaining the answer.
 In this thesis, these questions are applied to matrix multiplication.
 Of course there are already conventional algorithms to compute matrix multiplic
ation.
 This thesis contributes a simple analysis of how the wavelet operator can
 be applied to matrix multiplication.
\layout Standard

The two most desired qualities in the computation of matrices are sparseness
 and the condition number.
 Sparseness for a matrix states that a good majority of the elements in
 such a matrix are zero.
 The condition number indicates how accurately an operation will be performed
 on the system.
 Wavelets contribute to numerical methods by providing a stable preconditioning
 technique which produces a more sparse and better conditioned than the
 original matrix.
 Various forms of the wavelet transform are key to applying wavelets as
 a preconditioning tool.
\layout Standard

Matrix multiplication has applications in simulations, computer vision,
 and almost all areas of computational science.
 Classic matrix multiplication has a computational complexity of order 
\begin_inset Formula \( N^3\)
\end_inset 

 operation, which makes it costly in the number of instructions that are
 needed to carry out the operation.
 Faster matrix multiplication techniques depend on the matrix being sparse
 to reduce the number elements that need to be multiplied.
 As shown in the results section, there exists various levels of acceptable
 sparseness that are generated by the wavelet transform.
\layout Standard

For matrix multiplication, wavelets provide a preconditioning method that
 transforms a dense matrix into a sparse one.
 Thus sparse matrix multiplication can be applied more effectively to general
 class of matrices.
 Wavelet preconditioning may or may not help for matrices that are already
 sparse.
\layout Standard

In this thesis, an overview is provided to define wavelets and how to apply
 them.
 This overview uses image processing to demonstrate the qualities of a two-dimen
sional
 wavelet transform.
 The next chapter describes the wavelet matrix multiplication procedure.
 Chapter 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{chp:results}

\end_inset 

 demonstrates matrix multiplication in the wavelet domain and shows the
 results of different threshold levels on the fidelity of the resulting
 product.
 Finally, conclusions are presented.
\the_end
