# The reLyX bundled with LyX 1.3 created this file.
# For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass report
\paperfontsize 11
\use_amsmath 1
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0

\layout Standard

In this chapter, the general concept of matrix multiplication via wavelets
 is introduced.
 In addition, the chapter provides proof that the Haar Wavelet Transform
 can precondition matrix, and produces the same answer.
 A little bit of matrix multiplication and sparse matrix multiplication
 itself is reviewed for completeness.
\layout Section

Matrix Multiplication
\layout Standard

Matrix multiplication is this ...
\layout Standard

What is sparse matrix multiplication?
\layout Standard

Matrix multiplication is one of the fundamental operations in linear algebra.
 It is defined for two matrices 
\begin_inset Formula \( A\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( B\)
\end_inset 

, denoted 
\begin_inset Formula \( A\cdot B\)
\end_inset 

.
 Matrix multiply requires that the row length of A to be the same as the
 column length of B.
 Lastly, the matrix multiplication operation is defined: 
\begin_inset Formula \[ 
c_{i,j} = \sum\limits_k a_{i,k} b_{k,j}.
\]
\end_inset 

 Matrix multiplication also obeys the following properties 
\layout Itemize

Associative law: 
\begin_inset Formula \( (AB)C = A(BC)\)
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Left Distributive Law 
\begin_inset Formula \( A (B+C) = AB + AC\)
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Right Distributive Law 
\begin_inset Formula \( (B+C)A = BA + CA\)
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Distribution of a constant 
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{lipschutz}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Consider a 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2 \times 2\)
\end_inset 

 matrix, this example matrix multiplication: 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} \displaystyle
\label{eqn:conventional}
A \cdot B = 
\left(\begin{array}{cc}  a^1_1&  a^2_1 \\ a^1_2 &  a^2_2 \end{array}\right)
\left(\begin{array}{cc}  b^1_1&  b^2_1 \\ b^1_2 &  b^2_2 \end{array}\right) =
\left(\begin{array}{cc}  a^1_{1} b^1_{1} + a^2_{1} b^1_{2}&  a^1_{1}b^2_{1} + a^2_{1}  b^2_{2}    \\ a^1_{2} b^1_{1} + a^2_{2} b^1_{2} &  a^1_{2} b^2_{1} + a^2_{2} b^2_{2} 
\end{array}\right)
\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

There is a fast matrix multiply which was devised in 1969 by Strassen.
 It tends to obtain a computational complexity of 
\begin_inset Formula \( O(N^{2.807})\)
\end_inset 

.
 This works for square even dimensioned matrices.
 There is a variation of the Strassen called the Winograd obtains slightly
 better performance. 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{lederman}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Another view on matrix multiplication is sparse multiplication, is the use
 of sparse matrix multiply.
 One method is included in the Sparse Matrix Multiplication Package, called
 SYMBMM 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \cite{bank}

\end_inset 

.
 An other is the one contained Basic Linear Algebra Subprogram for sparse
 matrix to dense matrix multiply.
\layout Standard

The whole point of sparse matrix multiplication is to take a matrix such
 that the matrix composition is mostly zero, and exploit that composition
 to reduce the number of multiplications required.
 Such multiplication schemes optimal limit for matrix multiplication is
 
\begin_inset Formula \( O(N^2)\)
\end_inset 

.
\layout Section

Wavelet Matrix Multiplication
\layout Standard

The point of this thesis is not show the efficiencies of these above algorithms.
 Rather, it is to show a pre-conditioner using the wavelet transform that
 can be used in each of them.
 Wavelet based matrix multiply is sound for the Haar Wavelet Transform and
 the 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi^n\)
\end_inset 

 expansion.
 In other words, All terms contributed by the wavelet transform on the operation
 of matrix multiplication are cancelled in the inverse.
 If the Haar Wavelet Transform produces a sparse and well conditioned matrix,
 then the Haar Wavelet Transform proves itself as a useful preconditioner.
 In this chapter, the general concept of matrix multiplication via wavelets
 is introduced, and the linearity principle is shown.
 The key point for wavelet matrix multiplication is the proof that 
\begin_inset Formula \( W(A) \times W(B) = W(A\times B)\)
\end_inset 

 If this is the case, then it is obvious that 
\begin_inset Formula \( W(A) \times W(B) = W(\Gamma) = W(A\times B = \Gamma)\)
\end_inset 

. 
\layout Subsection

A 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2\times 2\)
\end_inset 

 example
\layout Standard

The feasibility of multiplication in the wavelet domain is demonstrated
 directly using a 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2 \times 2\)
\end_inset 

 matrix.
 The coefficients of the matrices are multiplied both according to normal
 matrix multiplication and the modified wavelet multiplication operator.
 In the end the resulting coefficients are seen to be the same.
\layout Subsubsection

Wavelet Transforms of the Matrices
\layout Standard

For a wavelet transform, the result on matrix 
\begin_inset Formula \( A\)
\end_inset 

 is 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}  \label{WA} \displaystyle
W(A) = 
{1 \over 2} 
\left(\begin{array}{cc}  
\left(a^1_1 + a^1_2 + a^2_1 + a^2_2\right) & 
\left(a^1_1 + a^1_2 - a^2_1 - a^2_2\right)  \\ 
\left(a^1_1 - a^1_2 + a^2_1 - a^2_2\right) & 
\left(a^1_1 - a^1_2 - a^2_1 + a^2_2\right)   
\end{array}\right), 
\end{equation}
\end_inset 

 and for matrix 
\begin_inset Formula \( B\)
\end_inset 

 it is 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}  \label{WB} \displaystyle
W(B) = {1 \over 2} 
\left(\begin{array}{cc}
\left(b^1_1 + b^1_2 + b^2_1 + b^2_2\right) &
\left(b^1_1 + b^1_2 - b^2_1 - b^2_2\right) \\ 
\left(b^1_1 - b^1_2 + b^2_1 - b^2_2\right) &  
\left(b^1_1 - b^1_2 - b^2_1 + b^2_2\right)
\end{array}\right).
\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

Product of 
\begin_inset Formula \( A\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( B\)
\end_inset 

 in wavelet space
\layout Standard

The conventional product of 
\begin_inset Formula \( A\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( B\)
\end_inset 

 (equation 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{eqn:conventional}

\end_inset 

) can be transformed into wavelet space.
 The wavelet transform of this matrix is represented by 
\begin_inset Formula \[ 
W(A \cdot B) =
{1 \over 2}
\left(
\begin{array}{cc}
\psi(A) & \psi(V) \\
\psi(H) & \psi(D)
\end{array}
\right)
\]
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{eqnarray} 
\label{eqn:abwavelet1}
\psi(A) &=& (a^1_1 b^1_1 + a^2_1 b^1_2 + a^1_1b^2_1 + a^2_1  b^2_2) + (a^1_2 b^1_1 + a^2_2 b^1_2 + a^1_2 b^2_1 + a^2_2 b^2_2)\\
\label{eqn:abwavelet2}
\psi(V) &=&(a^1_1 b^1_1 + a^2_1 b^1_2  - a^1_1b^2_1 - a^2_1  b^2_2) +  (a^1_2 b^1_1 + a^2_2 b^1_2 - a^1_2 b^2_1 - a^2_2 b^2_2 ) \\
\label{eqn:abwavelet3}
\psi(H) &=& (a^1_1 b^1_1 + a^2_1 b^1_2 + a^1_1b^2_1 + a^2_1  b^2_2) - (a^1_2 b^1_1 + a^2_2 b^1_2 + a^1_2 b^2_1 + a^2_2 b^2_2)\\
\label{eqn:abwavelet4}
\psi(D) &=& (a^1_1 b^1_1 + a^2_1 b^1_2  - a^1_1b^2_1 - a^2_1  b^2_2) - (a^1_2 b^1_1 + a^2_2 b^1_2 - a^1_2 b^2_1 - a^2_2 b^2_2 ).
\end{eqnarray}
\end_inset 


\layout Subsubsection

The product of the waveletized matrices
\layout Standard

Straight forward multiplication of 
\begin_inset Formula \( W(A) \cdot W(B)\)
\end_inset 

 represented by equations 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{WA}

\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{WB}

\end_inset 

 works out as follows: 
\begin_inset Formula \[ 
W(A) \cdot W(B) = 
{1 \over 4} 
\left(
\begin{array}{cc}
W_A & W_V \\
W_H & W_D
\end{array}
\right)
\]
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{eqnarray*} 
W_A &=& (a^1_1 + a^1_2 + a^2_1 + a^2_2)( b^1_1 + b^1_2 + b^2_1 + b^2_2) + ( a^1_1 + a^1_2 - a^2_1 - a^2_2)(b^1_1 - b^1_2 + b^2_1 - b^2_2) \\
W_V &=& ( a^1_1 + a^1_2 + a^2_1 + a^2_2) ( b^1_1 + b^1_2 - b^2_1 - b^2_2) + (a^1_1 + a^1_2 - a^2_1 - a^2_2) ( b^1_1 - b^1_2 - b^2_1 + b^2_2)  \\
W_H &=&  ( a^1_1 - a^1_2 + a^2_1 - a^2_2)(b^1_1 + b^1_2 + b^2_1 + b^2_2) +  ( a^1_1 - a^1_2 - a^2_1 + a^2_2 ) (b^1_1 - b^1_2 + b^2_1 - b^2_2) \\
W_D &=& ( a^1_1 - a^1_2 + a^2_1 - a^2_2) (b^1_1 + b^1_2 - b^2_1 - b^2_2)+( a^1_1 - a^1_2 - a^2_1 + a^2_2 )(b^1_1 - b^1_2 - b^2_1 + b^2_2)
\end{eqnarray*}
\end_inset 

 which simplifies to 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{eqnarray*} 
W_A &=& a^1_1 b^1_1 + a^1_2 b^1_1 + a^2_1 b^1_2 + a^2_2 b^1_2 + a^1_1 b^2_1 + a^1_2 b^2_1 + a^2_1 b^2_2 + a^2_2 b^2_2 \\
W_V &=& a^1_1 b^1_1 + a^1_2 b^1_1 + a^2_1 b^1_2 + a^2_2 b^1_2 - a^1_1 b^2_1 - a^1_2 b^2_1 - a^2_1 b^2_2 - a^2_2 b^2_2 \\
W_H &=& a^1_1 b^1_1 - a^1_2 b^1_1 + a^2_1 b^1_2 - a^2_2 b^1_2 + a^1_1 b^2_1 - a^1_2 b^2_1 + a^2_1 b^2_2 - a^2_2 b^2_2 \\
W_D &=& a^1_1 b^1_1 - a^1_2 b^1_1 + a^2_1 b^1_2 - a^2_2 b^1_2 - a^1_1 b^2_1 + a^1_2 b^2_1 - a^2_1 b^2_2 + a^2_2 b^2_2 
\end{eqnarray*}
\end_inset 

 These can then be compared to the coefficients of 
\begin_inset Formula \( W(A \cdot B)\)
\end_inset 

 in equations 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{eqn:abwavelet1}

\end_inset 

-
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{eqn:abwavelet2}

\end_inset 

 and seen to be identical.
 This asserts that 
\begin_inset Formula \( W(A) \cdot W(B) = W(A \cdot B)\)
\end_inset 

 in the case of 
\begin_inset Formula \( 2 \times 2\)
\end_inset 

 matrices.
\layout Subsection

Haar Wavelets and Vector Inner Products
\layout Standard

One of the other crucial keys for the Haar Wavelet Transform Matrix Multiply
 to work is vector inner product.
 The issue is whether or not 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} \langle f', g' \rangle = \langle f,g \rangle \end{equation}
\end_inset 

 is true for vectors 
\begin_inset Formula \( f\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( g\)
\end_inset 

 which both of length 
\begin_inset Formula \( p\)
\end_inset 

, and the wavelet transformed versions of 
\begin_inset Formula \( f\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( g\)
\end_inset 

 denoted 
\begin_inset Formula \( f'\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( g'\)
\end_inset 

 respectively.
 To show this, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \langle f',g' \rangle\)
\end_inset 

 is expanded algebraically to establish its identity. 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} 
\label {vectinwt}\langle f',g' \rangle = \sum \limits_{k=0} ^{p/2 -1}(\frac{f_{2k} +f_{2k+1}}{\sqrt{2}} \cdot \frac{g_{2k} + g_{2k+1}}{\sqrt{2}}) + \sum \limits_{k=0} ^{p/2 -1}(\frac{f_{2k} - f_{2k+1}}{\sqrt{2}} \cdot \frac{g_{2k} - g_{2k+1}}{\sqrt{2}})\end{equation}
\end_inset 

 When equation 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{vectinwt}

\end_inset 

 is expanded further, the terms that emerge expose the identity of the inner
 product. 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{eqnarray} \label {vectinwte}
\langle f',g' \rangle = \frac{1}{2}  \sum \limits_{k=0} ^{p/2 -1}
( f_{2k} g_{2k} + f_{2k+1}g_{2k} + f_{2k}g_{2k+1} + f_{2k+1}g_{2k+1}  \\ \nonumber+  f_{2k} g_{2k} - f_{2k+1}g_{2k} - f_{2k}g_{2k+1} + f_{2k+1}g_{2k+1} \end{eqnarray}
\end_inset 

 When simplified the 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{2k}g_{2k+1}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{2k+1}g_{2k}\)
\end_inset 

 terms cancel.
 The 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{2k}g_{2k}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( f_{2k+1}g_{2k+1}\)
\end_inset 

 terms combine to yield equation 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{vectinwtsimple}

\end_inset 

 and further simplifies to equation vectinwtsimple2. 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} \label {vectinwtsimple}
\langle f',g' \rangle = \frac{1}{2}  \sum \limits_{k=0} ^{p/2 -1} (f_{2k}g_{2k} + f_{2k+1}g_{2k+1})\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} \label {vectinwtsimple2}
\langle f',g' \rangle = \frac{1}{2}  \sum \limits_{k=0} ^{p-1} (f_{k}g_{k} ) = \langle f,g \rangle\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

Matrix Multiply with the Haar Transform: Formal Proof
\layout Standard


\series bold 
Given
\series default 
 two arbitary matrices 
\begin_inset Formula \( A\)
\end_inset 

 of size 
\begin_inset Formula \( m\times p\)
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula \( B\)
\end_inset 

 of size 
\begin_inset Formula \( m\times p\)
\end_inset 

, the Haar Wavelet Pair, and the Haar Wavelet Transform.
 The wavelet pair to be used here is 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi_H (x)= \sqrt{\frac{1}{2}} \left\{\begin{array}{cc}1 & x=0 \\-1 & x=1 \\0 & otherwise\end{array}\right.\]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[ \phi_H (x) = \sqrt{\frac{1}{2}} \left\{\begin{array}{cc}1 & x=0 \\0 & otherwise\end{array}\right. \]
\end_inset 

 Also, this notation is used for this proof. 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{1R}(S)\)
\end_inset 

 is the row transform of matrix 
\begin_inset Formula \( S\)
\end_inset 

. 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{1C}(S)\)
\end_inset 

 is the column transform of matrix 
\begin_inset Formula \( S\)
\end_inset 

. 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( \psi {S}\)
\end_inset 

 is the 2-D wavelet transform of matrix 
\begin_inset Formula \( S\)
\end_inset 

. 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( \langle f,g \rangle = \langle \psi_1(f) , \psi_1(g) \rangle \)
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( A' = \psi(A)\)
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( B' = \psi(B)\)
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( A^R =\psi_{1R}(A) \)
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( B^C =\psi_{1C}(B) \)
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( A^R_{ri}\)
\end_inset 

 is the row vector 
\begin_inset Formula \( i\)
\end_inset 

 of the row transform of 
\begin_inset Formula \( A\)
\end_inset 

. 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( A^R_{ri+1}\)
\end_inset 

 is the row vector 
\begin_inset Formula \( i+1\)
\end_inset 

 of the row transform of 
\begin_inset Formula \( A\)
\end_inset 

. 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( B^C_{cj}\)
\end_inset 

 is the column vector 
\begin_inset Formula \( j\)
\end_inset 

 of the column transform of 
\begin_inset Formula \( B\)
\end_inset 


\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( B^C_{cj+1}\)
\end_inset 

 is the column vector 
\begin_inset Formula \( j+1\)
\end_inset 

 of the column transform of 
\begin_inset Formula \( B\)
\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Required
\series default 
 show that 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi (A) \psi (B) = \psi (A B) \]
\end_inset 

 is a true statement. 
\series bold 
Proof
\series default 

\layout Standard

There are two formulae required for transforming either A or B into the
 wavelet domain. 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} 
\label{wavedefc4A}
 \psi (A) = \psi _{1R} ( \psi_{1C} (A)) = \psi _{1C} ( \psi_{1R} (A))
\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} 
\label{wavedefc4B}
\psi (B) = \psi _{1R} ( \psi_{1C} (B)) = \psi _{1C} ( \psi_{1R} (B))    
\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Thus, this is simply a re-write of the definition of the wavelet transform
 by the CWT.
 Next, define a matrix 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'\)
\end_inset 

 so that 
\begin_inset Formula \[ \Gamma' = \psi (A) \psi (B) \]
\end_inset 

.
 From, the definition 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'\)
\end_inset 

, a series of re-writes and the properties of the Haar Wavelet Transform
 can expose the solution for every element of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'\)
\end_inset 

.
 In general, the elements of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'\)
\end_inset 

 defined as follows: 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} 
\label{wavecrossA}
\Gamma'_{i,j} =   \left\langle \psi_{1C} (\psi_{1R} (A)) _{ri} , \psi_{1R} (\psi_{1C} (B)) _{ci}  \right\rangle
\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} 
\label{wavecrossB}
\Gamma'_{i,j} =   \left\langle \psi_{1R} (\psi_{1C} (A)) _{ri} , \psi_{1C} (\psi_{1R} (B)) _{ci}  \right\rangle
\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

In this case, each element of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'\)
\end_inset 

 is defined as nothing more than the inner product of row 
\begin_inset Formula \( i\)
\end_inset 

 of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi(A)\)
\end_inset 

 and column 
\begin_inset Formula \( j\)
\end_inset 

 of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi(B)\)
\end_inset 

.
 This is in agreement with standard matrix multiplication.
 Another identity that is important what the wavelet pair for transform
 will do in either a row or column transform. 
\begin_inset Formula \[   \psi _{1C} (A) = \left\{ 
\begin{array}{ll}
\frac{A_{i,j}+A_{i,j+1}}{\sqrt{2}} & j<col \\ 
\frac{A_{i,j}-A_{i,j+1}}{\sqrt{2}} & j\geq col\end{array}
\right.   \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[   \psi _{1R} (A) = \left\{ 
\begin{array}{ll}
\frac{A_{i,j}+A_{i+1,j}}{\sqrt{2}} & i<row \\ 
\frac{A_{i,j}-A_{i+1,j}}{\sqrt{2}} & i\geq row\end{array}
\right. 
 \]
\end_inset 

 In this case, there are four cases to show for: 
\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( i < \frac{row}{2}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( j <  \frac{col}{2}\)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( i \geq \frac{row}{2}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( j <  \frac{col}{2}\)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( i < \frac{row}{2}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( j \geq  \frac{col}{2}\)
\end_inset 


\layout Enumerate


\begin_inset Formula \( i \geq \frac{row}{2}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( j \geq  \frac{col}{2}\)
\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Case 1
\series default 
 
\begin_inset Formula \( i < \frac{row}{2} \)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( j < \frac{col}{2}\)
\end_inset 

.
 The base equation 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 in this cases is as follows: 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} 
\label{case1inner}
 \Gamma'_{ij} = \left\langle \frac {A^R_{ri} + A^R_{ri+1}}{\sqrt{2}} , \frac {B^C_{cj} + B^C_{cj + 1}}{\sqrt{2}} \right\rangle
\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

This re-write must be expanded to expose an equality.
 This expansion is valid for vectors sums within inner products.
 Thus 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 in this case is expanded to: 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \Gamma'_{i,j} = \frac{1}{2} ( \left\langle A^R_{ri}, B^C_{cj}   \right\rangle +   \left\langle A^R_{ri+1}, B^C_{cj}   \right\rangle +  \left\langle A^R_{ri}, B^C_{cj + 1}   \right\rangle +  \left\langle A^R_{ri+1}, B^C_{cj+1}   \right\rangle    ) \]
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Next, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 must be compared to 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi(\Gamma)_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi (A B)  = \psi (\Gamma)    \]
\end_inset 

 By definition, every element in 
\begin_inset Formula \( C\)
\end_inset 

 is defined: 
\begin_inset Formula \[  C_{i,j} =   \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle \]
\end_inset 

 The next step is to show what every element within this case is for 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi(\Gamma)\)
\end_inset 

.
 This is done by analyzing what the column transform will do at 
\begin_inset Formula \( C_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

.
 To do this, the column transform is applied to both column 
\begin_inset Formula \( j\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( j+1\)
\end_inset 

 for columns between 
\begin_inset Formula \( [0,\frac{col}{2} -1]\)
\end_inset 

.
 The effects of these column transforms are defined in equations 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{rowwtC1c1}

\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{rowwtC2c1}

\end_inset 

. 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} \displaystyle\label {rowwtC1c1}
 \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle \end{equation}
\end_inset 


\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} \label {rowwtC2c1}
\psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j+1} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle \\end{equation}
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The result of the row transform on 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{1C}(\Gamma)\)
\end_inset 

 in this case is a sum of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{1C}(\Gamma)_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{1C}(\Gamma)_{i,j+1}\)
\end_inset 

, and specified in equation 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{rowtfCc1}

\end_inset 

. 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} \label{rowtfCc1}
 \psi(\Gamma) = \frac{1}{\sqrt {2}} (\psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j} + \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j+1}   )\end{equation}
\end_inset 

 Expanded this equation is equation 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{rowtfCc1e}

\end_inset 

. 
\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation} \label{rowtfCc1e}
 \psi(\Gamma) = \frac{1}{2} (  \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle   ) \end{equation}
\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Case 2
\series default 
 
\begin_inset Formula \( i \geq frac{row}{2}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( j <  \frac{col}{2}\)
\end_inset 

.
 The base equation 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 in this cases is as follows: 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \Gamma'_{ij} = \left\langle \frac {A^R_{ri,j} - A^R_{ri+1}}{\sqrt{2}} , \frac {B^C_{cj} + B^C_{cj + 1}}{\sqrt{2}} \right\rangle  \]
\end_inset 

 The next step is to show what every element within this case is for 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi(\Gamma)\)
\end_inset 

. 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \Gamma'_{i,j} = \frac{1}{2} ( \left\langle A^R_{ri}, B^C_{cj}   \right\rangle -   \left\langle A^R_{ri+1}, B^C_{cj}   \right\rangle +  \left\langle A^R_{ri}, B^C_{cj + 1}   \right\rangle -  \left\langle A^R_{ri+1}, B^C_{cj+1}   \right\rangle    ) \]
\end_inset 

 How does this compare with 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi (\Gamma)\)
\end_inset 

? 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi (A B)  = \psi (\Gamma)    \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  (\Gamma) = \psi  \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle \]
\end_inset 

 This equation expands with wavelet operator to: 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle   \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j+1} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle \,\, \]
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The result of the row transform on 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{1C}(\Gamma)\)
\end_inset 

 in this case is a sum of 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{1C}(\Gamma)_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi(\Gamma) = \frac{1}{\sqrt {2}} (\psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j} + \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j+1}   ) \]
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Expanded this equation is equation 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{rowtfCc1e}

\end_inset 

. 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi(\Gamma) = \frac{1}{2} (  \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle   ) \]
\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Case 3
\series default 
 
\begin_inset Formula \( i < \frac {row}{2}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( j \geq \frac{col}{2}\)
\end_inset 

.
 Like, before the base case for 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \Gamma'_{ij} = \left\langle \frac {A^R_{ri,j} + A^R_{ri+1}}{\sqrt{2}} , \frac {B^C_{cj} - B^C_{cj + 1}}{\sqrt{2}} \right\rangle  \]
\end_inset 

 Again, the vector sums are expanded within their inner products. 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \Gamma'_{i,j} = \frac{1}{2} ( \left\langle A^R_{ri}, B^C_{cj}   \right\rangle +   \left\langle A^R_{ri+1}, B^C_{cj}   \right\rangle -  \left\langle A^R_{ri}, B^C_{cj + 1}   \right\rangle -  \left\langle A^R_{ri+1}, B^C_{cj+1}   \right\rangle    ) \]
\end_inset 

 Next, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 is compared with 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi(\Gamma)\)
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi (A B)  = \psi (\Gamma)    \]
\end_inset 

 Next, the column transform expansion is conducted: 
\begin_inset Formula \[  (\Gamma) = \psi  \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle   \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j+1} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle \,\, \]
\end_inset 

 Now the column transform results are combined, by subtraction in this case:
 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi(\Gamma) = \frac{1}{\sqrt {2}} (\psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j} - \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j+1}   ) \]
\end_inset 

 Lastly, the expanded form is expanded. 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi(\Gamma) = \frac{1}{2} (  \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle   ) \]
\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\series bold 
Case 4
\series default 
 
\begin_inset Formula \( i \geq \frac {row}{2}\)
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula \( j \geq \frac{col}{2}\)
\end_inset 

.
 Like, before the base case for 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \Gamma'_{ij} = \left\langle \frac {A^R_{ri,j} - A^R_{ri+1}}{\sqrt{2}} , \frac {B^C_{cj} - B^C_{cj + 1}}{\sqrt{2}} \right\rangle  \]
\end_inset 

 Again, the vector sums are expanded within their inner products. 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \Gamma'_{i,j} = \frac{1}{2} ( \left\langle A^R_{ri}, B^C_{cj}   \right\rangle -   \left\langle A^R_{ri+1}, B^C_{cj}   \right\rangle -  \left\langle A^R_{ri}, B^C_{cj + 1}   \right\rangle +  \left\langle A^R_{ri+1}, B^C_{cj+1}   \right\rangle    ) \]
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Next, 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'_{i,j}\)
\end_inset 

 is compared with 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi(\Gamma)\)
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi (A B)  = \psi (\Gamma)    \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  (\Gamma) = \psi  \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle \]
\end_inset 

 Once the column wavelet transform expands 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma\)
\end_inset 

 to 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle   \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j+1} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle \,\, \]
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Now the column transform results are combined, by subtraction in this case:
 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi(\Gamma) = \frac{1}{\sqrt {2}} (\psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j} - \psi_{1C} (\Gamma)_{i,j+1}   ) \]
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Lastly, the expanded form is expanded. 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi(\Gamma) = \frac{1}{2} (  \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj}  \right\rangle - \left\langle A_{ri} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle + \left\langle A_{ri +1} , B_{cj+1}  \right\rangle   ) \]
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Since the inner product of two vectors 
\begin_inset Formula \( f,g\)
\end_inset 

 is the same as their wavelet transformed vectors 
\begin_inset Formula \( f',g'\)
\end_inset 

, then all 4 cases produce a case where 
\begin_inset Formula \( \Gamma'_{i,j} = (\psi (\Gamma))_{i,j} \,\,\forall (i,j)\)
\end_inset 

.
 Thus for the Haar Wavelet Transform (discrete mother basis), 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi (A) \cdot \psi(B) = \psi (A\cdot B) \]
\end_inset 

.
\layout Section

Multi Resolution Expansion Proof
\layout Standard

In a previous section, wavelet based matrix multiplication was proven such
 that 
\begin_inset Formula \[ \psi(A) \cdot \psi(B) = \psi (A\cdot B) \]
\end_inset 

 In this section the question of whether or not there is MRE form which
 is sound for matrix multiplication.
 There are few facts that are relevant and were made obvious in the empirical
 analysis in the results chapter. 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{WPx} (A) \not= \psi^x(A) \)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{WPx} (A) \)
\end_inset 

 is the 
\begin_inset Formula \( x\)
\end_inset 

 resolution of wavelet transform packets (full decomposition) except for
 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=1\)
\end_inset 

. 
\layout Itemize


\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{Wx} (A) \not= \psi^x(A) \)
\end_inset 

 where 
\begin_inset Formula \( \psi_{Wx} (A) \)
\end_inset 

 is the 
\begin_inset Formula \( x\)
\end_inset 

 resolution of wavelet transform pyramids except for 
\begin_inset Formula \( x=1\)
\end_inset 

. 
\layout Standard

The next hypothesis to be answered is can the wavelet transform be applied
 more than once to condition a matrix for matrix multiplication? This question
 is answered by the following lemma.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi ^2 (A) \cdot \psi^2 (B)  = \psi^2(A\cdot B) \]
\end_inset 

 Proof: 
\newline 
The theorem 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi(A) \cdot \psi(B) = \psi (A\cdot B) \]
\end_inset 

 is proven as fact. 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi^2(A) = \psi(\psi (A))\]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi^2 (A) =\cdot \psi^2 (B) = \psi(\psi(A)) \cdot \psi (\psi (B))  \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi(\psi(A)) \cdot \psi (\psi (B)) = \psi (\psi(A) \cdot \psi(B) ) \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi (\psi(A) \cdot \psi(B) ) = \psi (\psi(A \cdot (B))  \]
\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi (\psi(A \cdot (B)) = \psi^2(A \cdot B) \]
\end_inset 

 Therefore: 
\begin_inset Formula \[  \psi ^2 (A) \cdot \psi^2 (B)= \psi^2(A \cdot B) \]
\end_inset 


\the_end
